---
title: Requirements
---

# Requirements Overview

The core elements of TAIBOM are identification and attestation. In this section, we consider each of these in more detail and identify a wide range of requirements. We finish by describing a specific subset of those requirements that are particularly useful and that we intend to focus on during the course of this project.


## System and Component Identification

TAIBOM attestations communicate claims about the properties of an identifiable entity or set of entities. As was previously discussed, TAIBOM needs to be flexible with regards to what is identified and the means by which it is identified. This is because different parties will be interested in making, or searching for, claims about the properties of different sets of entities.

For example, a TAIBOM claim might assert that:

* a particular dataset is poisoned in a particular way
* a particular dataset is composed from other particular datasets
* particular inference code on a particular framework on a particular platform has a vulnerability
* particular inference code and weights applied to a particular dataset achieve a particular level of performance on a particular benchmark
* a particular benchmark tests memorisation in a particular domain
* a particular inference was generated by a particular combination of inference code, weights and mix of adaptors
* a particular set of weights was generated using particular training code, a particular training configuration and a particular mix of datasets
* particular training code implements a particular training algorithm
* a particular webpage contains a prompt injection attack
* a set of weights was downloaded from a particular source
* a set of weights were produced by a particular company
* a set of weights are associated with particular terms of use
* an inference was obtained from a particular service provider
* a particular service provider provides a particular indemnification

Each claim should, ideally, identify the largest set of entities to which it applies. If, for example, a particular dataset contains poisoned data, we can reason broadly about the impact of the poisoning if we have a claim relating to the poisoning of the dataset, claims informing us what other datasets incorporate the dataset and claims telling us which model weights were produced by training on which datasets. If we only have a vey narrow claim that a particular set of weights were trained on poisoned data, we are unable to generalise.

Similarly, when users search for TAIBOMs, they should be able to specify complex queries - that is, they should be able to specify sets of entities of interest in complex ways. For example, someone might want to find weights trained on data excluding a particular dataset, that achieves a specified minimum level of performance on a benchmark, as attested to by a party other than the one that trained the model; or they might want to find the best performing such model that has terms of use that permit commercial use; etc.

Many of TAIBOM's use cases relate either to the inference behaviour of a system or its legal status and it is therefore essential that TAIBOM is able to distinguish between systems with different inference behaviours and legal statuses.

## Factors Affecting Inference Behaviour

Depending on the type of the AI system, it's inference behaviour is potentially influenced by a wide range of factors, such as it's training data; the training algorithm; the code used for training; the inference algorithm; the code used for inference; the weights used for inference; its training and inference configurations; adaptors used during inference; data used during inference; etc.

Some of these factors have a hierarchical structure. For example, in terms of inference behaviour, the code used for inference is likely to form a behavioural cluster beneath the inference algorithm, where different implementations of the same algorithm might be provided within different frameworks or on different platforms, with small variations in behaviour. In some cases, attestations might relate to the use of a particular algorithm irrespective of the detail of how it is implemented, but, in other cases, attestations might relate to a specific implementation of a specific algorithm within a specific framework.

Similarly, we might expect to see the inference behaviour of a system conditionally independent of some factors in the presence of others. For example, the combination of weights and code used for inference might be sufficient to completely determine the behaviour of the system during inference, in which case, in terms of behavioural attestations, the training data, training code and training algorithm become irrelevant in the sense that two systems with identical weights and inference code will exhibit the same inference behaviour regardless of differences in how they were trained and hence all attestations that relate to inference behaviour that apply to one will also apply to the other.

It should be noted, however, that having information about how a model is trained might still be useful. It is possible, for example, that systems trained using a particular approach tend to have specific properties, such as adversarial robustness. Providing information about how a model was trained will, in some cases, therefore make it possible to infer certain properties of its inference behaviour even when there are no attestations that are explicitly about the inference behaviour.

The inference behaviour of an AI system might also be affected by data that are retrieved during inference. For example, a system might use a private corpus to answer questions from a user. How such a system is represented in TAIBOM depends on where the boundary of the system is drawn: if the boundary is drawn around the AI system that does the inference and all the data that it has access to, then the system can be assigned attestations that are static in the sense that they are the same for each inference.

In practice, however, such a boundary might be so large as to be almost useless. Consider, for example, a system that uses the internet to answer questions. Including the entire internet within the boundary of the system is likely to allow for only very limited attestations in many cases, particularly when it comes to properties like the system's security and the factuality of its outputs.

In such cases, it might be useful to draw a more specific boundary around the AI system that includes only the specific data that were accessed during a specific inference. This creates a dynamic inference-level TAIBOM that supplements the static system-level TAIBOM and reflects the fact that the effective structure and content of the system changes with each inference.

TAIBOMs could be associated with webpages that are known to contain content that adversely affects certain types of AI systems, which is conceptually similar to maintaining a reputation list or blacklist. For example, webpages have been created that attempt to modify the behaviour of Bing Chat. By providing a TAIBOM for such pages, it would be possible to provide a dynamic supplemental TAIBOM for Bing Chat that reflects the fact that some of its properties, such as its trustworthiness and the factual accuracy of its outputs, vary on a per inference basis. 

Similarly, we are starting to see the emergence of models that dynamically apply different mixtures of adaptors or invoke different mixtures of experts or external tools at inference time. Again, static TAIBOM attestations for such systems can account for their static or gross properties, while dynamic supplemental TAIBOMs can be issued per inference to account for the dynamic structure of the system and its inference specific properties.

An additional consideration is that some AI systems are stateful in the sense that their behaviours are determined by their histories. Consider, for example, a chatbot that can access the internet and also automatically creates and maintains a list of useful facts and uses them during a conversation. The behaviour of the chatbot will be a function of the deep history of the conversation and not just its recent history or the currently retrieved webpage. 

Such a system could be described by the static and dynamic TAIBOMs that have already been discussed, but with the difference that the properties attested to in the per inference TAIBOM might be affected by the entire history of the system rather than just the current inference.

A final consideration relating to inference behaviour is that the primary input to an AI system (in contrast to retrieved content) might also affects its behaviour in a way that might have implications for inference behaviour-related attestations. For example, some attestations might apply only when the input is, in some sense, "in distribution" or consistent with the system's intended use. Again, this implies a that TAIBOM should be able to support dynamic attestations that vary on each inference.

This section has discussed factors affecting the inference behaviour of an AI system. The following section discusses the legal statuses of AI systems.


## Factors Affecting a System's Legal Status

The legal status of an AI system is intended to cover anything relating to the law, including licences, terms of use and regulations, as well a legal risks that might arise from the use of AI models, such as those relating to copyright. The legal status of a model might restrict its use, typically preventing commercial or military use, but might also offer indemnifications against loses arising from claims of copyright infringement.

The legal status of a system is typically affected by the datasets on which its components were trained, the creators of components, the suppliers of components, service providers, hosts, and the laws and regulations local to where the various components were developed, are hosted, are used and, potentially, where data originate. TAIBOM needs to be able to express the legal status of a system, making good use of compositionality to maximize its ability to generalise attestations.

For example, rather than a particular system hosted with a particular provider having the provider's terms associated with it individually, it is better to have the provider as a property of the system and the provider's terms be a property of the provider. This allows the terms for all systems with the same host to be updated automatically when the host's terms are updated and avoids the need to iterate of all system TAIBOMs and update them individually.

Composing legal constraints is typically easier than composing other types of properties because it is generally the case that the constraints on the system are the tightest of the constraints of its components. For example, if all components in a system have permissive licences, but one prohibits commercial use, then commercial use the system as a whole will also be prohibited.

The legal constrains on a system might also be relatively arbitrary in the sense that a particular buyer might obtain specific legal terms that do not apply to identical copies of the same system that are used by others. TAIBOM therefore needs to be able to represent such special cases and avoid overgeneralization.


## Other Considerations

We have so far focused on the inference behaviour and legal status of a system as they account for a large proportion of what stakeholders of TAIBOM are likely to care about. When it comes to trust more generally, however, there are other factors that might be relevant, such as the country where a system is hosted. Similarly, some cybersecurity issues are not related to inference behaviour specifically, but they still relate to the behaviour of the AI system. TAIBOM needs to be able to represent the factors relating to the presence or absence of such issues, which are typically related to the inference software, the host environment, etc. and relate to traditional SBOM.


## Combining Attestations

Combining entities is common in the AI space. For example, datasets are frequently remixed into different combinations, or built upon; and model weights are combined with adaptors; etc. TAIBOM needs to be able to approximate the effects of forming such combinations so that we can efficiently infer the likely properties of the combined entity from its components. We use the word "approximate" here because the effects of combination may be complex and depend on what are being combined.

For example, combining a base model with an adaptor does not necessarily preserve the properties of either the base model or the adaptor. Similarly, combining datasets is compositional in terms of some properties, such as whether the combined dataset is poisoned, but not necessarily in terms of others, such as whether the combined dataset is statistically biased in some particular way. We therefore need to be clear as to which combinations produce composition and which produce modulation with respect to which properties. 

In other words:

* Properties of components are modulatory with respect to other properties of the combined entity if the latter depend on a specific combination of the former and hence it is not possible to generalise the latter from one combination to another.

* Properties of components are compositional if the combined entity directly inherits the properties of its components.

So, for example, applying an adaptor or combining training datasets is modulatory with respect to model inference behaviour and hence any property that is a function of inference behaviour cannot be generalized across adaptors or differently composed training datasets. On the other hand, whether a training dataset contains poisoned data, contains copyrighted material, or has terms of use that prohibit the commercial use of trained models are compositional and hence can be generalized across datasets based on their components.

TAIBOM should recognize the distinction between modulatory and compositional properties.


# TAIBOM Scope

The preceding discussion provided an overview of some of the wide range of capabilities that are required from a comprehensive AI bill of materials. It is intended that a flexible schema be developed as part of the TAIBOM project, along with a reasoning framework that allows users to make inferences about AI systems according to their own subjective preferences.

To demonstrate the core concepts of TAIBOM, it is proposed to focus on the use case of downloading a single AI model from a provider such as Hugging Face. This will involve representing some or all of the following information in static TAIBOMs and reasoning about the properties of the model:

* a list of datasets that form the training data for the model
* a list of the terms and conditions associated with the training datasets
* claims relating to problems with the training data, such as whether they are poisoned
* the architecture of the model
* the organization that trained the model
* the licence(s) under which the model is released
* claims relating to known problems with the model
* a hash of the trained model weights
* a hash of the model inference code
* claims relating to the benchmark performance of the model

Some or all of this information will be simulated to make it easy to demonstrate various effects, such as how different TAIBOM consumers with different trust in different providers of attestations have different views of the model.

A TAIBOM client will hash the model weights and code after download and retrieve relevant attestations according to preferences set by the user.
