---
title: 24/05/23 KO Meeting
---

# KO meeting 23rd May

## Attendees

Innovate
- Harvey Beilinsohn

NquiringMinds
- Nick
- Hannah
- John
- Ant
- Ash
- James
- Ionut

Copperhorse
- David Rogers

Techworks
- John Moor
- Gareth Richards

BAE
- Frederic Taylor

### Apologies
- Matilda Rhode (BSI)
- Laura Stevens (BSI)
- Innovate could not attend as can't access Webex

## Agenda
- Nick to go through slides 

## Notes
Link to Harvey's Minutes by email: https://drive.google.com/open?id=1sZSoKBPgdBUIxfFbdCXek5jYNNdFYiVp&usp=drive_fs

Harvey requested all partners present for the quarterly meetings

Harvey
- Think of as a Critical Friend
- Call him if you want help or have questions e.g. on scope/staffing

Nick presented slides

Question from Harvey - who is resp for Commercial evaluation report - NQM

Risk table to be updated - to be reviewed each Q
Legislation risk (critical) discussed

PCR - move labour to subcontract - an existing contractor
- Harvey suggests preparing PCR and submit on portal

Shift some BSI budget to Oxford uni
- Separate PCR
- Sumit on portal

PCRs taking a month currently

Next meeting - on Teams - as Innovate canâ€™t access Webex

Exploitation - will need final version of Exp Plan at end of project
Harvey suggests updating each Q
Have section (slides)  on Exploitation/dissemination each meeting

Finances

Meet - week to 2 weeks before end of the Q
- MANDATORY - Update Annex 4 for each meeting
- MANDATORY - Presentation
- Optional (suggested) exploitation plan updated each Q
- Optional (suggested) update spend profile (forecast)
- MANDATORY - evidence (technical - Annex 4)
    - Labour - timesheets
    - Invoices
    - Cap ex - show workings
    - Travel and subsistence - subsistence - must be related to an overnight stay

After meeting Harvey will submit report to Innovate, then will wait for claims to come in

IAR - With the first claim, last claim and on every anniversary of the project start date

Q1 meeting to be 1st 2 weeks in June

## Actions

## AoB / Next Meeting